---
layout: post
title:  "Are startup events too focused on building?"
date:   2013-11-23 15:13:33
tags:   
---

<!-- p.p1 {margin: 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px; font: 12.0px Helvetica} -->build-a-company events could help teams make considerably more real progress by including customers and focusing on learning instead of premature execution. It seems the next evolution of build-a-company-in-a-weekend events is emerging.

<!-- p.p1 {margin: 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px; font: 12.0px Helvetica} -->This blog post aims to identify how the entrepreneurial community requirements differ from the development comunity

And... how the approach of the minimum viable product can meet these needs.

<!-- p.p1 {margin: 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px; font: 12.0px Helvetica} -->It started with Hack weekends, which were an opportunity for developers to momentarily step out of the production chain pipeline to turn around experimental ideas in a rapid fashion. As this grew from the development community the approach of rapid protoypting made sense as much was to be learnt by how you could do something technically. The format was then picked up and applied to a broader criteria i.e. that of the entrepreneurial community (not all of who are techies). As the requirements of this community vary, the format has been challenged in different ways. Most significantly for an entrepreneur it is important to establish why something is necessary prior to over investing.

I've have loads of fun and learned a lot at these hackdays, but this model doesn't seem well-suited for launching a business. It's too focused on building something fast with a conspicuous absence of learning to iterate fast. We've seen The Lean Startup Machine take the next step, and here in the UK there's an appetite for a kind of MVPCamp.

Let's look at these types of events, from Hackday to Startup Weekend to Disrupt. What are they optimised for?
<ul>
	<li>to create the best possible demonstration of a company in a weekend</li>
	<li>demos or pitches - some kind of tangible end result</li>
	<li>subjective judgement - usually by investors - as a proxy for commercial success</li>
	<li>promotion - these events are almost always looking for an exciting PR story</li>
</ul>
<h2>What could we optimise instead?</h2>
<ol>
	<li>entrepreneurial learning - make better entrepreneurs, not quick companies</li>
	<li>speed and quality of iteration</li>
	<li>commercial validation</li>
</ol>
These events could present much greater opportunities to entrepreneurs by attracting a wider audience than just entrepreneurs, builders and investors. If you're familiar with Customer Development already, you'll be thinking - what about the customers?

The biggest pain of early stage validation is finding and making meetings with potential customers, commissioners, buyers and the people with the real problems we're trying to solve. Large event formats can attract these people on a large scale. This can enable very fast iterations around problem and solution discovery. Rather than working in isolation, teams can grab a real customer for 5 minutes to validate hypothesis and designs, rather than waiting until after the whole event to get that feedback. Further, this learning can be shared so that each team can learn from the other, increasing everyone's speed and learning.
<h2>Can this be done collaboratively?  Will entrepreneurs be willing to share their customer development knowledge with other startups?</h2>
I've heard some examples of early stage collaboration around problem discovery, as entrepreneurs with different strengths and interests can focus on different aspects of a greater problem, or on different solutions. Rob Fitzpatrick will remind us that we have to build our startup into somewhere we want to work, otherwise we've failed.  This constraint opens up the opportunity for close collaboration in customer problem discovery, then working on different (but still possibly compatible) solutions after.
<h2>Will customers be open about their problems in front of their competitors?</h2>
The Enterprise Open Innovation space is becoming, well, more open. We're starting to see examples of this, but Dave Chapman pointed out that getting right mix of people from an industry will be key. The People Speak have years of experience in creative collaborative event formats for 150-500 people, quite often in competitive (and sometimes hostile) environments.

Now's a good time to open the discussion about this as there's an appetite for this and I'm researching this as a continuation of Leancamp. I've been speaking to the backers of Leancamp and will other interested people like Rob Fitzpatrick (The Startup Toolkit), Nico Macdonald (Media Futures), Dave Chapman (UCL) about this, so a lot of this thinking is credited to them. I'd like to speak to Nicky Smyth, Josh Russel, Dan W, Damien Saunders, Mike Butcher, Roland Harwood in the near future as well, as this will be on
