---
layout: post
title:  "Helping Accelerators Disrupt Themselves"
date:   2013-11-23 15:13:33
tags:   
---

<blockquote>'In some cases, it makes sense to join a better-aligned program'   The examples you list seem vertical-specific, not modular. "Modular" seems more like multiple accelerators each doing a subset of the education experience. Either sequentially (starting with a LSM or L48, then going to an accelerator while filling in gaps via GA) or in parallel (getting your mentoring from one accelerator, your demo day from another, and your funding from a third).   The YC dig also feels a bit defensive. I think they most companies could seriously benefit and are willing to move. But YC can only serve so many companies, and only wants to serve certain types.   I like the intro and the wrap up (3 hard parts).  I think just saying that those bits are hard and we want to make them better for all accelerators (and everyone else) is enough -- the disruption/modularisation bit in the middle feels like it's being forced in, rather than playing an important role in the greater argument.</blockquote>
When I started Founder-Centric with Rob Fitzpatrick, we wanted to be Disruptive, but not to put our mark on the world or to do something grandiose. We wanted to be Disruptive to help. I had already declined a few offers to run or create accelerator programs. Like a lot of us, I saw the accelerator bubble coming, but I saw it as a good thing for founders. I declined the offers because I expected a certain kind of shift; I'd be able to help more if my approach aligned with it. So rather than help one accelerator, Founder Centric helps as many as we can, with X Y Z, and in an open way.  We can do this because of Disruptive forces that help accelerators.
<h2>The shift to modularisation</h2>
One of the big Disruptive industry shifts is from integration to modularisation. PCs went from integrated (IBM) to modularised (Generic + Windows). So did phones: Nokia to Generic + Android. This has happened in other industries too. Now, we're seeing this with accelerators. At first, the new demands and new ways of measuring performance in the new market are not met by the industry leaders, so they must integrate everything themselves to get the best performance possible. (If you had an iPhone 1 or 2, you had this love/hate relationship with it, right?) But at some point, parts of the new market have what they want, so they're more persuaded by lower prices or customisation. New modular players come in, usually enabled by some industry standards. Integrating with other companies via standards is easier and allows companies to focus on improvements elsewhere. The original leader ends up finding their internal (non-open) integration is a liability, and constrains them to the ever-shrinking high-end of the market. And the hard part shifts. With PCs, the hard part became CPUs, so Intel slowly gravitated to CPUs. With phones, it became the app marketplaces and developer ecosystems.
<h2>Modularisation in accelerators</h2>
So with accelerators, we thought it'd be most helpful to align with the shift to modularisation. Not every startup needs Y-Combinator nor is willing to move to San Francisco for it. In some cases, it makes more sense to go where your customers are. In some cases, it makes sense to join a better-aligned program like Springboard IoT or Mobile, Mozilla's WebFWD (open source) or AcceleratorHK (open access to Telerik resources). Rob and I had decided we could help more founders by building a business to help other accelerators, we could be open with spreading our content and systems. And we could focus on some hard parts that we love, but accelerators struggle with:
<ol>
	<li>No team left behind - all teams get their "demo" into customers hands in close to half the time, so they benefit from the accelerator in their following pivots as well.</li>
	<li>The Wall of Noise - founders get a lot of conflicting advice and can't make good use of it. We give them tools to make sense of it and make better decisions.</li>
	<li>Ingrain long-term founder skills. Our goal is to make better founders, which makes a more powerful alumni network and attracts better teams.</li>
</ol>
So far, our accelerators are happy with us, and we're growing our list of impressive clients: X Y Z.  The best part is, we can be open with our know-how. We're always open to to chat.
