---
layout: post
title:  "How to regain your hotel guests' trust & get better reviews"
date:   2013-11-23 15:13:33
tags:   Business
---

The UK Hotel industry has changed substantially in the past 4 years, with two significant trends:
<ol>
	<li>The rise of user-generated content, dubbed Travel 2.0.</li>
	<li>The move of investment capital towards mid-range and budget hotels</li>
</ol>
This has forced mid-range hoteliers to address the leading edge of hotel marketing for the first time.  For the last decade, the hoteliers’ struggle against intermediaries has been lead by 4- and 5-star brands.  Intermediaries have seized control of guest profile information, and in turn, the benefits of an ongoing relationship with guests.  Agents who provide platforms for user-generated content, such as <a href="http://www.tripadvisor.com">Tripadvisor</a>, have won market share. Research and development by Marriott and Ritz-Carleton has helped counteract the increased control of intermediaries.   The budget sector has benefited by applying the best practices created by these more upscale counterparts.

Investment in hotels is moving away from 5-star and 4-star properties, towards 3-star hotels which offer a greater return on capital.  Marriott’s strategy has been congruent with this, with increased investment in their mid-range Courtyard hotels.  This trend has caused a shift away from personal service, as hotels reduce staff, and a loss in immediate feedback channels for guests. Guests have felt a loss of control, as their requests go unanswered, and turn to review sites in frustration.

Travel 2.0 represents a large opportunity for hotels and guests to regain control.  Customers are relying on each other because of credibility, and hotels can present the most credible context for reviews.  Companies in other industries that have recently exposed their complaint and feedback processes have seen large increases in sales and customer loyalty, and valuable insights into their product development.  This transparency also leads to customer confidence, as it becomes clear that intermediaries are not in a position to facilitate action based on feedback.

For example, <a href="http://www.dellideastorm.com/">Dell</a> has provided its customers a feedback platform. This has historically been the domain of computer review websites. In doing so, Dell has:
<ul>
	<li>Become their customers' first destination for feedback and reviews</li>
	<li>Increased participation in the process (since customers know their feedback applies directly to product development, rather than industry commentary)</li>
	<li>Prioritised their efforts according to customer demand</li>
	<li>Established their own feedback platform as a leader in industry commentary</li>
	<li>Fostered loyalty by establishing direct relationships with many of their customers</li>
</ul>
Similar opportunities are available to hoteliers. As hotel provide these types of feedback platforms, their websites will demonstrate how the hotel reacts to feedback, building guest confidence. This strategy ultimately leads to hotel websites becoming the standard reference point for the quality of the hotel.
