---
layout: post
title:  "How do I implement a pricing model without giving too much away?"
date:   2013-11-23 15:13:33
tags:   
---

<div>Pricing right requires a bit of customer research so you can be confident that you're pricing according to value delivered to your customer, and not leaving money on the table. My preferred ways to get the information I need are customer interviews and online smoke tests. In this post, I'll explain how I approach this.</div>
<h3><strong>3 pricing elements you must always keep in mind</strong></h3>
<div>At first, there are 3 things you will need to keep in mind:</div>
<div>
<ul>
	<li>your customer segments,</li>
	<li>the problem that your product solves from their point of view,</li>
	<li>your customers' alternatives.</li>
</ul>
</div>
<h3>Getting started</h3>
<div>
<ol>
	<li>For each segment, write down your customer problem hypotheses.  What are the problems you expect your customers to have that your product solves? Get 3 or 4 of these down if possible. Use personas if you get stuck, but be quick.</li>
	<li>Get customer contact. This can be through cold-calling,  online smoke tests, forums and communities, or good ol' networking. If you already have any point where a customer calls you or gives you their contact information, that's your in. The closer to the sale, the better, but the key here is to be able to get in touch personally.</li>
	<li>Ask for interviews. Make it clear you're doing research about the problems, not selling anything.</li>
</ol>
</div>
<h3>2 main goals for each pricing interview</h3>
<div>
<ol>
	<li>Find out the NBCA - the Next Best Competitive Alternative - to the problems. What have they done without you all along? What is the money and time cost of this? Note: there may be more than one alternative.</li>
	<li>Work out if the the customer has <a href="http://www.saintsal.com/2011/09/5-traits-of-earlyvangelists-aka-how-to-solve-problems-that-pay/">"Earlyvangelist" qualities</a>. This is a Customer Development term, which means they: have the problem, know they have the problem, are actively looking for a solution, have tried solutions on their own, and have budget.</li>
</ol>
</div>
<h3>Tips for your interviews</h3>
<ul>
	<li>Don't lead the interviewee towards your solution or your hypotheses. You're looking to see if they come up on their own when you ask them to explain the problem and their solutions to you.  So if your idea is an iPhone App for calculating tips, you'll ask, "Tell me about the last time you went out for dinner," not "tell me about how you calculate tips when you're out for dinner."</li>
	<li>If you find that you've slipped into sales mode, just stop and apologise. "Sorry, I slipped into sales mode there! Can we get back to what you were saying about what you tried?"</li>
	<li>Ask them how they did it before the looked for you.</li>
	<li>Ask them how they started looking for a solution. (How they started looking is not the same as how they found you.)</li>
	<li>When they mention alternatives they tried, find out what other problems this solved. Ask about alternatives for these problems too.</li>
	<li>Each time, ask how much time and money they spent on the alternatives.</li>
</ul>
<h3>Analysing the results</h3>
I take loads of notes in interviews, in short 2- to 5-word points, and use symbols to note specific things, like problem, alternative, cost. This makes them easier to analyse later. Once I've done at least 5 interviews, I go back and reorganise the notes around the problems, alternatives and costs - looking for patterns. I also organise the notes around the original problems hypotheses I had, which helps me see if I have an accurate understanding of the customers problems.

When I get consistent signals about a problem from a specific segment, I look at all of the alternatives that come up. For each, I work out the total cost and benefit of that alternative, not just what they paid, but how much time it took, if there was any opportunity cost, or how it impacted their overall process. Sometimes a small delay or imperfection early on turns out to be really costly down the road.

For example, when I interview people about Leancamp workshops, I find out how they've been looking for the information they need, and who they've tried to hire to help. A lot of times, people find good information online, so I ask if they've ever had questions later on, and what happened then. Many people reach out to the blog author, who isn't available to help and they get stuck in a critical time. This gives me a better understanding of the cost/benefit of using Google as an alternative to Leancamp workshops.

With an idea of total cost and benefit of all the alternatives from the customers point of view, I compare that to the total cost and benefit of what I have to offer.  It is from here that I am better informed to make a decision about what the product is actually worth to them.

If you notice differences between your segments, separate them and analyse them separately. Consider which features are essential to the segment that gets higher value. You'll want to reserve these features for them. A good example of this is open source software. Enterprise customers get the most value, and can pay the most, but they need good support. So the software itself is free, but 24-hour support is really expensive.
<h3>Smoke Testing</h3>
Now that you have a good idea of a pricing model, I suggest you find a way to test it. You should have a clear idea of what offer you'd give what customer segment at what price. You should also have written down the words your interviewees used to describe their problems and solutions - try these words in your messaging. Without overcomplicating it, that's a really quick Google Adwords or Facebook campaign.  Or you can try the price on your website if it gets enough customer traffic. Put the price right in the ad. Measure the click-through rate.

If you're worried about reputation, use a disposable brand name for these tests. You're just testing pricing sensitivity here, you don't need to advertise your actual company if that makes you uncomfortable.

Once people have clicked, they should go to a coming soon page, where you ask for their email address and promise not to spam them. Each email you get is another Customer Development lead, so get back to each of them personally to refine your understanding of the customer and their problem.

Once you're happy with your conversion rate <em>onto</em> the landing page, you can further validate by building out the conversion forms all the way to sale, as if the product exists. But landing pages are an issue for another post.  If you're at the point of need to optimise your landing page, you should already have significant confidence in your pricing because you know people are clicking on the offer with a price tag attached.
<h3>Further reading &amp; information</h3>
Books:
Pricing Strategy and Tactics - my main pricing reference
Four Steps to the Epiphany - my main Customer Development reference
Entrepreneurs' guide to Customer Development  - great starting point for Customer Development.

Slideshows:
Customer Development Hacks - good for online smoke tests

Videos:
Workshops:
